Migrate and update "Generic Sensor API" article from WebFu (#4603)
GoogleChrome/web.dev: src/site/content/en/blog/generic-sensor/index.md

> ---

Author: Added the `devices` tag.

> title: Sensors For The Web

Author: Fixed.

> subhead: Use the Generic Sensor API to enable advanced features of your app

Author: Fixed.

authors:
  - alexshalamov
  - pozdnyakov
  - thomassteiner
description: |
  Sensors are used in many platform-specific applications to enable advanced features.
  Wouldn't it be nice to bridge the gap between native and the web?
  You can do it with Generic Sensor API, which is enabled by default as of Chrome 67.
date: 2017-09-18
updated: 2021-02-05
tags:
  - blog
  - sensors
  - capabilities
hero: # ⚠️ [TODO] Fix hero, old hero was "/web/updates/images/generic/screen-rotation.png"!
alt: # ⚠️ [TODO] Add alt text!
---

Today, sensor data is used in many platform-specific applications to enable use cases such
as immersive gaming, fitness tracking, and augmented or virtual reality. Wouldn't

> it be cool to bridge the gap between platform-specific and web applications? The [Generic Sensor

Author: :-) Sure!

> it be cool to bridge the gap between platform-specific and web applications? The [Generic Sensor

Author: ```suggestion
it be cool to bridge the gap between platform-specific and web applications? Enter the [Generic Sensor
```

> it be cool to bridge the gap between platform-specific and web applications? The [Generic Sensor

Author: We can certainly change it to this, yes.

API](https://www.w3.org/TR/generic-sensor/), for the web!

> ## What is the Generic Sensor API? {: #what-is-generic-sensor-api }

Reviewer: I really like the approach of leading off with a quick "browser compatibility" section at the top of these guides as a courtesy to developers who treat browser compat as a top concern

@tomayac no action needed here on your part, just FYI. I will forward this comment to @petele and @jpmedley for discussion.

More on the rationale of why I'm so obsessed about browser compat here: https://web.dev/handbook/content-checklist/#compatibility

Author: Added.

The [Generic Sensor API](https://www.w3.org/TR/generic-sensor/) is a set of
interfaces which expose sensor devices to the web platform. The API consists

> of the base [Sensor](https://w3c.github.io/sensors/#the-sensor-interface)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of the base [`Sensor`](https://w3c.github.io/sensors/#the-sensor-interface)
```
Please format these all as code since they are (presumably) actual interfaces that you can access in JS. It seems like `Gyroscope`, `AbsoluteOrientation`, etc. should also be formatted as code for the same reason

interface and a set of concrete sensor classes built on top. Having a base
interface simplifies the implementation and specification process for the
concrete sensor classes. For instance, take a look at the

> [Gyroscope](https://w3c.github.io/gyroscope/#gyroscope-interface)

Author: ```suggestion
[`Gyroscope`](https://w3c.github.io/gyroscope/#gyroscope-interface)
```

class, it is super tiny! The core functionality is specified by the base

> interface, and Gyroscope merely extends it with three attributes representing

Author: ```suggestion
interface, and `Gyroscope` merely extends it with three attributes representing
```

angular velocity.

Typically a concrete sensor class represents an actual sensor on the platform,
e.g., accelerometer or gyroscope. However, in some cases, implementation of a
sensor class [fuses](https://w3c.github.io/sensors/#sensor-fusion) data from
several platform sensors and exposes the result in a convenient way to the user.
For example, the

> [AbsoluteOrientation](https://www.w3.org/TR/orientation-sensor/#absoluteorientationsensor)

Author: ```suggestion
[`AbsoluteOrientation`](https://www.w3.org/TR/orientation-sensor/#absoluteorientationsensor)
```

sensor provides a ready-to-use 4×4 rotation matrix based on the data obtained
from the accelerometer, gyroscope, and magnetometer.

You might think that the web platform already provides sensor data and you are

> absolutely right! For instance, [DeviceMotion](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/DeviceMotionEvent)
> and [DeviceOrientation](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/DeviceOrientationEvent)

Author: ```suggestion
absolutely right! For instance, [`DeviceMotion`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/DeviceMotionEvent)
and [`DeviceOrientation`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/DeviceOrientationEvent)
```

> events expose motion sensor data. So why do we need new API?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
events expose motion sensor data. So why do we need a new API?
```

> Comparing to the existing interfaces, Generic Sensor API provides great

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Comparing to the existing interfaces, Generic Sensor API provides a great
```

number of advantages:

- Generic Sensor API is a sensor framework that can be easily extended
  with new sensor classes and each of these classes will keep the generic
  interface. The client code written for one sensor type can be
  reused for another one with very few modifications!

> - You can configure the sensor, for example, set the sampling frequency suitable for your

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- You can configure the sensor. For example, you can set the sampling frequency suitable for your
```

Author: Done.

  application needs.
- You can detect whether a sensor is available on the platform.
- Sensor readings have high precision timestamps, enabling better
  synchronization with other activities in your application.
- Sensor data models and coordinate systems are clearly defined, allowing
  browser vendors to implement interoperable solutions.
- The Generic Sensor based interfaces are not bound to the DOM (neither
  `navigator` nor `window` objects), and it opens up future opportunities of using
  the same API within service workers or implementing Generic Sensor API in headless

>   JS runtimes, for instance, on embedded devices.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  JS runtimes, such as embedded devices.
```

Author: Fixed

- [Security and privacy](#privacy-and-security) aspects are the top priority
  for the Generic Sensor API and provide much better security level compared to

>   older sensor APIs. There is integration with Permissions API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  older sensor APIs. There is integration with the Permissions API.
```

- Automatic [synchronization with screen coordinates](#synchronization-with-screen-coordinates) is
  available for `Accelerometer`, `Gyroscope`, `LinearAccelerationSensor`, `AbsoluteOrientationSensor`,
  `RelativeOrientationSensor` and `Magnetometer`.

> ## Generic Sensor APIs in Chrome {: #generic-sensor-api-in-chrome }

Reviewer: Ah, OK. This was written for developers.google.com/web. It would be good to rephrase this to focus on cross-browser compatibility rather than Chrome only.

Author: Fixed.

At the time of writing, Chrome supports several sensors that you can experiment with.

**Motion sensors:**

- `Accelerometer`
- `Gyroscope`
- `LinearAccelerationSensor`
- `AbsoluteOrientationSensor`
- `RelativeOrientationSensor`

**Environmental sensors:**

- `AmbientLightSensor`
- `Magnetometer`

> The Generic Sensor-based motion sensor classes are enabled by default in Chrome
> starting from Chrome 67.
> 
> You can enable environmental sensors for development purposes by turning on a
> feature flag. Go to
> [chrome://flags/#enable-generic-sensor-extra-classes](chrome://flags/#enable-generic-sensor-extra-classes)
> to enable environmental sensors. Restart Chrome and you should be good to go.
> 
> More information on browser implementation status can be found on
> [chromestatus.com](https://www.chromestatus.com/features/5698781827825664?embed)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Generic Sensor-based motion sensor classes are enabled by default in Chrome
starting from Chrome 67, and in Chromium forks such as Edge or Samsung Internet.
You can find more information on browser implementation status by searching for
["sensor" on caniuse](https://caniuse.com/?search=sensor).
```

## What are all these sensors? How can I use them? {: #what-are-sensors-how-to-use-them }

> Sensors is a quite specific area which might need a brief introduction. If you are familiar with

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Sensors is an area that might need a brief introduction. If you are familiar with
```

sensors, you can jump right to the [hands-on coding section](#lets-code). Otherwise, let's look at
each supported sensor in detail.

### Accelerometer and linear acceleration sensor {: #acceleration-and-linear-accelerometer-sensor }

<div class="w-figure w-figure--inline-right" style="max-width:50%">
  <figure>

>     <img  src="accelerometer.gif"

Author: Done.

         alt="Accelerometer sensor measurements">

>     <figcaption class="w-figcaption"><b>Figure 1</b>: Accelerometer sensor measurements</figcaption>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    <figcaption class="w-figcaption">Accelerometer sensor measurements</figcaption>
```

Reviewer 2: I can't find any text that refers to a figure by its number, and web.dev doesn't number figures. Can you please remove them throughout.

  </figure>
</div>

> The [`Accelerometer`](https://www.w3.org/TR/accelerometer/#intro) sensor measures

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The [`Accelerometer`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Accelerometer) sensor measures
```

acceleration of a device hosting the sensor on three axes (X, Y, and Z). This
sensor is an inertial sensor, meaning that when the device is in linear free
fall, the total measured acceleration would be 0 m/s<sup>2</sup>, and when a
device lying flat on a table, the acceleration in upwards direction (Z axis)
will be equal to the Earth's gravity, i.e. g ≈ +9.8 m/s<sup>2</sup> as it is
measuring the force of the table pushing the device upwards. If you push the
device to the right, acceleration on the X axis would be positive, or negative
if the device is accelerated from the right toward the left.

Accelerometers can be used for things like: step counting, motion sensing, or
simple device orientation. Quite often, accelerometer measurements are combined

> with data from other sources in order to create fusion sensors, such as,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
with data from other sources to create fusion sensors, such as,
```

orientation sensors.

> The [`LinearAccelerationSensor`](https://w3c.github.io/accelerometer/#linearaccelerationsensor-interface)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The [`LinearAccelerationSensor`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/LinearAccelerationSensor)
```

measures acceleration that is applied to the device hosting the sensor,

> excluding the contribution of a gravity force. When a device is at rest, for

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
excluding the contribution of gravity. When a device is at rest, for
```

> instance, lying flat on the table, the sensor would measure ≈ 0 m/s<sup>2</sup>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
instance lying flat on the table, the sensor would measure ≈ 0 m/s<sup>2</sup>
```

acceleration on three axes.

### Gravity sensor {: #gravity-sensor }

It is already possible for users to manually derive readings close to those of a gravity sensor
by manually inspecting `Accelerometer` and `LinearAccelerometer` readings, but this can be
cumbersome and depend on the accuracy of the values provided by those sensors.
Platforms such as Android can provide gravity readings as part of the operating system,
which should be cheaper in terms of computation, provide more accurate values depending
on the user's hardware, and be easier to use in terms of API ergonomics. The
[`GravitySensor`](https://w3c.github.io/accelerometer/#gravitysensor-interface) returns
the effect of acceleration along the device's X, Y, and Z axis due to gravity.

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

As of February 2021, GravitySensor is still under development with no estimated release date.

```

Author: Will link to https://bugs.chromium.org/p/chromium/issues/detail?id=1163993 to make this clearer.

### Gyroscope {: #gyroscope-sensor }

<div class="w-figure w-figure--inline-right" style="max-width:50%">
  <figure>

>     <img  src="gyroscope.gif"

Author: Done.

        alt="Gyroscope sensor measurements">
    <figcaption class="w-figcaption"><b>Figure 2</b>: Gyroscope sensor measurements</figcaption>
  </figure>
</div>

> The [`Gyroscope`](https://w3c.github.io/gyroscope/#intro) sensor measures angular

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The [`Gyroscope`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Gyroscope) sensor measures angular
```

> velocity in rad/s around the device's local X, Y, and Z axis. Most of the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
velocity in radians per second around the device's local X, Y, and Z axis. Most
```

consumer devices have mechanical
([MEMS](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Microelectromechanical_systems))
gyroscopes, which are inertial sensors that measure rotation rate based on
[inertial Coriolis force](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Coriolis_force). MEMS
gyroscopes are prone to drift that is caused by the sensor's gravitational
sensitivity which deforms the sensor's internal mechanical system. Gyroscopes
oscillate at relative high frequencies, e.g., 10s of kHz, and therefore, might
consume more power compared to other sensors.

### Orientation sensors {: #orientation-sensors }

<div class="w-figure w-figure--inline-right" style="max-width:50%">
  <figure>

>     <img  src="orientation.gif"

Author: Done.

         alt="AbsoluteOrientation sensor measurements">
    <figcaption class="w-figcaption"><b>Figure 3</b>: AbsoluteOrientation sensor measurements</figcaption>
  </figure>
</div>

> The [`AbsoluteOrientationSensor`](https://w3c.github.io/orientation-sensor/#orientationsensor-interface)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The [`AbsoluteOrientationSensor`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/AbsoluteOrientationSensor)
```

is a fusion sensor that measures rotation of a device in relation to the
Earth's coordinate system, while the

> [`RelativeOrientationSensor`](https://w3c.github.io/orientation-sensor/#relativeorientationsensor-interface)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[`RelativeOrientationSensor`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/RelativeOrientationSensor)
```

provides data representing rotation of a device hosting motion sensors in
relation to a stationary reference coordinate system.

All modern 3D JavaScript frameworks support [quaternions](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quaternion)
and [rotation matrices](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rotation_matrix)
to represent rotation; however, if you use WebGL directly,

> the [`OrientationSensor`](https://w3c.github.io/orientation-sensor/#orientationsensor-populatematrix)
> interface has convenient methods for WebGL compatible rotation matrices.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the `OrientationSensor` conveniently has both a [`quaternion`
property](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/OrientationSensor/quaternion)
and a [`populateMatrix()`
method](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/OrientationSensor/populateMatrix).
```

    sensorRel.populateMatrix(rotationMatrix);
    torus.matrix.fromArray(rotationMatrix);
}
sensorRel.start();
```

**[BABYLON](http://doc.babylonjs.com/classes/3.0/abstractmesh#rotationquaternion-quaternion-classes-3-0-quaternion-)**

```js
const mesh = new BABYLON.Mesh.CreateCylinder("mesh", 0.9, 0.3, 0.6, 9, 1, scene);
const sensorRel = new RelativeOrientationSensor({frequency: 30});
sensorRel.onreading = () => mesh.rotationQuaternion.FromArray(sensorRel.quaternion);
sensorRel.start();
```

**[WebGL](https://www.khronos.org/registry/webgl/specs/latest/2.0/)**

```js
// Initialize sensor and update model matrix when new reading is available.
let modMatrix = new Float32Array([1,0,0,0, 0,1,0,0, 0,0,1,0, 0,0,0,1]);
const sensorAbs = new AbsoluteOrientationSensor({frequency: 60});
sensorAbs.onreading = () => sensorAbs.populateMatrix(modMatrix);
sensorAbs.start();

// Somewhere in rendering code, update vertex shader attribute for the model
gl.uniformMatrix4fv(modMatrixAttr, false, modMatrix);
```

Orientation sensors enable various use cases, such as immersive gaming,
augmented and virtual reality.

For more information about motion sensors, advanced use cases, and requirements,

> please check the [motion sensors explainer](https://www.w3.org/TR/motion-sensors/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
check out the [motion sensors explainer](https://www.w3.org/TR/motion-sensors/)
```
https://developers.google.com/style/word-list#please

> please check the [motion sensors explainer](https://www.w3.org/TR/motion-sensors/)

Reviewer 2: When this article was originally written, this was the only option. Four years later, is there a better link?

Author: We can point to the slightly more recent editor's draft.

document.

## Synchronization with screen coordinates {: #synchronization-with-screen-coordinates }

By default, [spatial sensors'](https://w3c.github.io/sensors/#spatial-sensor) readings are resolved
in a local coordinate system that is bound to the device and does not take screen orientation into
account.

<figure class="w-figure">
  <img  src="device_coordinate_system.png"
       alt="Device coordinate system">

>   <figcaption class="w-figcaption"><b>Figure 4</b>: Device coordinate system</figcaption>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">Device coordinate system</figcaption>
```
Please delete these throughout the post

</figure>

However, many use cases like games or augmented and virtual reality require sensor readings to be
resolved in a coordinate system that is instead bound to the screen orientation.

<figure class="w-figure">
  <img  src="screen_coordinate_system.png"
       alt="Screen coordinate system">
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption"><b>Figure 5</b>: Screen coordinate system</figcaption>
</figure>

Previously, remapping of sensor readings to screen coordinates had to be implemented in JavaScript.
This approach is inefficient and it also quite significantly increases the complexity of the web

> application code: the web application must watch screen orientation changes and perform coordinates

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
application code; the web application must watch screen orientation changes and perform coordinates
```

[GitHub Pages](https://pages.github.com/) are served over HTTPS, making it a great place to share
your demos.

### 3D model rotation

In this simple example, we use the data from an absolute orientation sensor to
modify the rotation quaternion of a 3D model. The `model` is a three.js
[`Object3D`](https://threejs.org/docs/index.html#api/core/Object3D) class instance that
has a [`quaternion`](https://threejs.org/docs/index.html#api/core/Object3D.quaternion)
property. The following code snippet from the
[orientation phone](https://github.com/intel/generic-sensor-demos/tree/master/orientation-phone)
demo, illustrates how the absolute orientation sensor can be used to rotate a 3D model.

```js
function initSensor() {
    sensor = new AbsoluteOrientationSensor({frequency: 60});
    sensor.onreading = () => model.quaternion.fromArray(sensor.quaternion);
    sensor.onerror = event => {
        if (event.error.name == 'NotReadableError') {
            console.log("Sensor is not available.");
        }
    }
    sensor.start();
}
```

The device's orientation will be reflected in 3D `model` rotation within the WebGL scene.

<figure class="w-figure">

>   <img  src="orientation_phone.png"

Reviewer: Crop out the Android UI?

Author: Done.

    alt="Sensor updates 3D model's orientation">
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption"><b>Figure 6</b>: Sensor updates orientation of a 3D model</figcaption>
</figure>

### Punchmeter

The following code snippet is extracted from the
[punchmeter demo](https://github.com/intel/generic-sensor-demos/tree/master/punchmeter),
illustrating how the linear acceleration sensor can be used to calculate the maximum
velocity of a device under the assumption that it is initially laying still.

```js
this.maxSpeed = 0;
this.vx = 0;
this.ax = 0;
this.t = 0;

function onreading() {
    let dt = (this.accel.timestamp - this.t) * 0.001; // In seconds.
    this.vx += (this.accel.x + this.ax) / 2 * dt;

    let speed = Math.abs(this.vx);

    if (this.maxSpeed < speed) {
        this.maxSpeed = speed;
    }

    this.t = this.accel.timestamp;
    this.ax = this.accel.x;
}

/* … */

this.accel.addEventListener('reading', onreading);
```

The current velocity is calculated as an approximation to the integral of the
acceleration function.

<figure class="w-figure">

>   <img  src="punchmeter.png"

Reviewer: Crop out the Android UI?

Author: Done.

    alt="Demo web application for punch speed measurement">
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption"><b>Figure 7</b>: Measurement of a punch speed</figcaption>
</figure>

## Debugging and sensor overriding with Chrome DevTools

In some cases you don't need a physical device to play with the Generic Sensor API.
Chrome DevTools has great support for
[simulating device orientation](https://developers.google.com/web/tools/chrome-devtools/device-mode/orientation).

<figure class="w-figure">
  <img  src="orientation-model.png"
    alt="Chrome DevTools used to override the custom orientation data of a virtual phone.">
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption"><b>Figure 8</b>: Simulating device orientation with Chrome DevTools</figcaption>
</figure>

> ## Privacy and security {: #privacy-and-security }

Reviewer: This is all Chrome-focused as well

Author: Fixed.

Sensor readings are sensitive data which can be subject to various attacks from
malicious web pages. Chrome's implementation of Generic Sensor APIs enforces
a few limitations to mitigate the possible security and privacy risks. These
limitations must be taken into account by developers who intend to use the API,
so let's briefly list them.

### Only HTTPS

Because Generic Sensor API is a powerful feature, Chrome only allows it on
secure contexts.
In practice it means that to use Generic Sensor API you'll need to access your
page through HTTPS. During development you can do so via [http://localhost](http://localhost) but
for production
you'll need to have HTTPS on your server. See the [Safe and secure](/secure/)
collection for best practices and guidelines.

### Permissions Policy integration

The [Permissions Policy integration](https://w3c.github.io/webappsec-permissions-policy/)

> in Generic Sensor API is used to control access to sensors data for a frame.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
in Generic Sensor API controls access to sensors data for a frame.
```

By default the `Sensor` objects can be created only within a main frame or
same-origin subframes, thus preventing cross-origin iframes from unsanctioned
reading of sensor data. This default behavior can be modified by explicitly
enabling or disabling of the corresponding
[policy-controlled features](https://w3c.github.io/webappsec-permissions-policy/#features).

The snippet below illustrates granting accelerometer data access to a
cross-origin iframe, meaning that now `Accelerometer` or
`LinearAccelerationSensor` objects can be created there.

```html

> `<iframe src="https://third-party.com" allow="accelerometer"/>`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<iframe src="https://third-party.com" allow="accelerometer"/>
```

```

### Sensor readings delivery can be suspended

Sensor readings are only accessible by a visible web page, i.e., when the user
is actually interacting with it. Moreover, sensor data would not be provided

> to the parent frame if the user focuses to a cross-origin subframe in order to
> disallow the parent frame infer user input.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
to the parent frame if the user focus changes to a cross-origin subframe. This
prevents the parent frame infering user input.
```

## What's next? {: #whats-next }

There is a set of already specified sensor classes to be implemented in the near
future such as [Proximity sensor](https://w3c.github.io/proximity/);

> however thanks to the great extensibility of Generic Sensor framework we can

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
however, thanks to the great extensibility of Generic Sensor framework we can
```

maturity level, hence, the feedback from web and browser developers is highly appreciated. Let us
know what features would be great to add or if there is something you would like to modify in the
current API.

Please feel free to file [specification issues](https://github.com/w3c/sensors/issues/new)
as well as [bugs](https://bugs.chromium.org/p/chromium/issues/entry)
for the Chrome implementation.

## Resources
- Demo projects: [https://intel.github.io/generic-sensor-demos/](https://intel.github.io/generic-sensor-demos/)
- Generic Sensor API specification: [https://w3c.github.io/sensors/](https://w3c.github.io/sensors/)
- Specification issues: [https://github.com/w3c/sensors/issues](https://github.com/w3c/sensors/issues)
- W3C working group mailing list: [public-device-apis@w3.org](mailto:public-device-apis@w3.org)
- Chrome Feature Status: [https://www.chromestatus.com/feature/5698781827825664](https://www.chromestatus.com/feature/5698781827825664)
- Implementation bugs: [http://crbug.com?q=component:Blink>Sensor](http://crbug.com?q=component:Blink>Sensor)

> - Sensors-Dev Google group: [https://groups.google.com/a/chromium.org/forum/#!forum/sensors-dev](https://groups.google.com/a/chromium.org/forum/#!forum/sensors-dev)

Author: ```suggestion
- Sensors-Dev Google group: [https://groups.google.com/a/chromium.org/forum/#!forum/sensors-dev](https://groups.google.com/a/chromium.org/forum/#!forum/sensors-dev)

## Acknowledgements

This article was reviewed by
[Joe Medley](https://github.com/jpmedley) and
[Kayce Basques](https://github.com/kaycebasques).
```

[fusion sensors](https://w3c.github.io/sensors/#sensor-fusion), merge data from several low level
sensors to expose information a script would otherwise need to calculate. For example, the
[`AbsoluteOrientation`](https://www.w3.org/TR/orientation-sensor/#absoluteorientationsensor) sensor
provides a ready-to-use four-by-four rotation matrix based on the data obtained from the
accelerometer, gyroscope, and magnetometer.

You might think that the web platform already provides sensor data and you are absolutely right! For
instance, [`DeviceMotion`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/DeviceMotionEvent) and
[`DeviceOrientation`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/DeviceOrientationEvent)
events expose motion sensor data. So why do we need a new API?

Comparing to the existing interfaces, Generic Sensor API provides a great number of advantages:

- Generic Sensor API is a sensor framework that can be easily extended with new sensor classes and
  each of these classes will keep the generic interface. The client code written for one sensor type
  can be reused for another one with very few modifications!

> - You can configure the sensor, for example, to set the sampling frequency suitable for your

Author: ```suggestion
- You can configure the sensor. For example, you can set the sampling frequency suitable for your
```

  application needs.
- You can detect whether a sensor is available on the platform.
- Sensor readings have high precision timestamps, enabling better synchronization with other
  activities in your application.
- Sensor data models and coordinate systems are clearly defined, allowing browser vendors to
  implement interoperable solutions.
- The Generic Sensor based interfaces are not bound to the DOM (meaning they are neither `navigator`
  nor `window` objects), and this opens up future opportunities for using the API within service

>   workers or implementing it in headless JavaScript runtimes such as, for instance, on embedded

Author: ```suggestion
  workers or implementing it in headless JavaScript runtimes, such as embedded
```

  devices.
- [Security and privacy](#privacy-and-security) aspects are the top priority for the Generic Sensor
  API and provide much better security as compared to older sensor APIs. There is integration with
  the Permissions API.
- Automatic [synchronization with screen coordinates](#synchronization-with-screen-coordinates) is
  available for `Accelerometer`, `Gyroscope`, `LinearAccelerationSensor`,
  `AbsoluteOrientationSensor`, `RelativeOrientationSensor` and `Magnetometer`.

## Browser compatibility

The Generic Sensor API is supported by Google Chrome as of version 67. Most Chromium-derived
browsers like Microsoft Edge, Opera, or Samsung Internet support this API as well. For other
browsers, see [Can I use](https://caniuse.com/mdn-api_sensor). Note that the Generic Sensor API can
be [polyfilled](#polyfill).

## Available generic sensor APIs {: #available-generic-sensor-apis }

At the time of writing, there are several sensors that you can experiment with.

**Motion sensors:**

- `Accelerometer`
- `Gyroscope`
- `LinearAccelerationSensor`
- `AbsoluteOrientationSensor`
- `RelativeOrientationSensor`
- `GravitySensor`

**Environmental sensors:**

> - `AmbientLightSensor` (Behind the `#enable-generic-sensor-extra-classes` flag.)

Reviewer 3: Note that this applies only to Chromium-based browsers

Author: Added "in Chromium".

> - `AmbientLightSensor` (Behind the `#enable-generic-sensor-extra-classes` flag.)
> - `Magnetometer` (Behind the `#enable-generic-sensor-extra-classes` flag.)

Author: ```suggestion
- `AmbientLightSensor` (Behind the `#enable-generic-sensor-extra-classes` flag in Chromium.)
- `Magnetometer` (Behind the `#enable-generic-sensor-extra-classes` flag in Chromium.)
```

## Feature detection {: #feature-detection }

Feature detection of hardware APIs is tricky, since you need to detect both whether the browser
supports the interface in question, _and_ whether the device has the corresponding sensor. Checking
whether the browser supports an interface is straightforward. (Replace `Accelerometer` with any of
the other interfaces mentioned [above](#available-generic-sensor-apis).)

```js
if ('Accelerometer' in window) {
  // The `Accelerometer` interface is supported by the browser.
  // Does the device have an accelerometer, though?
}
```

For an actually meaningful feature detection result, you need to try to connect to the sensor, too.
This example illustrates how to do that.

```js
let accelerometer = null;
try {
  accelerometer = new Accelerometer({ frequency: 10 });
  accelerometer.onerror = (event) => {
    // Handle runtime errors.
    if (event.error.name === 'NotAllowedError') {
      console.log('Permission to access sensor was denied.');
    } else if (event.error.name === 'NotReadableError') {
      console.log('Cannot connect to the sensor.');
    }
  };

>   accelerometer.onreading = () => reloadOnShake(accelerometer);

Reviewer 3: Some users may be confused with this function reloadOnShake(). See https://github.com/GoogleChrome/web.dev/pull/4603#discussion_r573469284

Author: Duh, I have removed another instance, but this was left.

>   accelerometer.onreading = () => reloadOnShake(accelerometer);

Author: ```suggestion
  accelerometer.onreading = (e) => {
    console.log(e);
  };
```

  if (error.name === 'SecurityError') {
    console.log('Sensor construction was blocked by the Permissions Policy.');
  } else if (error.name === 'ReferenceError') {
    console.log('Sensor is not supported by the User Agent.');
  } else {
    throw error;
  }
}
```

## Polyfill

For browsers that do not support the Generic Sensor API, a
[polyfill](https://github.com/kenchris/sensor-polyfills) is available. The polyfill allows you to
load only the relevant sensors' implementations.

```js
// Import the objects you need.
import { Gyroscope, AbsoluteOrientationSensor } from './src/motion-sensors.js';

// And they're ready for use!
const gyroscope = new Gyroscope({ frequency: 15 });
const orientation = new AbsoluteOrientationSensor({ frequency: 60 });
```

## What are all these sensors? How can I use them? {: #what-are-sensors-how-to-use-them }

Sensors is an area that might need a brief introduction. If you are familiar with sensors, you can
jump right to the [hands-on coding section](#lets-code). Otherwise, let's look at each supported
sensor in detail.

### Accelerometer and linear acceleration sensor {: #acceleration-and-linear-accelerometer-sensor }

 <figure class="w-figure">

>   {% Video src="video/8WbTDNrhLsU0El80frMBGE4eMCD3/FCf9iuCaNASEB3V0x8Ld.mp4", width="800" %}

Author: ```suggestion
  {% Video src="video/8WbTDNrhLsU0El80frMBGE4eMCD3/FCf9iuCaNASEB3V0x8Ld.mp4", width="800", autoplay="true" %}
```

of gravity. When a device is at rest, for instance lying flat on the table, the sensor would measure
≈ 0 m/s<sup>2</sup> acceleration on three axes.

### Gravity sensor {: #gravity-sensor }

It is already possible for users to manually derive readings close to those of a gravity sensor by
manually inspecting `Accelerometer` and `LinearAccelerometer` readings, but this can be cumbersome
and depend on the accuracy of the values provided by those sensors. Platforms such as Android can
provide gravity readings as part of the operating system, which should be cheaper in terms of
computation, provide more accurate values depending on the user's hardware, and be easier to use in
terms of API ergonomics. The
[`GravitySensor`](https://w3c.github.io/accelerometer/#gravitysensor-interface) returns the effect
of acceleration along the device's X, Y, and Z axis due to gravity.

{% Aside %} As of February 2021, GravitySensor is still
[under development](https://bugs.chromium.org/p/chromium/issues/detail?id=1163993) with no estimated
release date. {% endAside %}

### Gyroscope {: #gyroscope-sensor }

 <figure class="w-figure">

>   {% Video src="video/8WbTDNrhLsU0El80frMBGE4eMCD3/7VItzZMC9Rb2QglsE3s5.mp4", width="800" %}

Author: ```suggestion
  {% Video src="video/8WbTDNrhLsU0El80frMBGE4eMCD3/7VItzZMC9Rb2QglsE3s5.mp4", width="800", autoplay="true" %}
```

  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">
    Gyroscope sensor measurements
  </figcaption>
</figure>

The [`Gyroscope`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Gyroscope) sensor measures
angular velocity in radians per second around the device's local X, Y, and Z axis. Most consumer
devices have mechanical ([MEMS](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Microelectromechanical_systems))
gyroscopes, which are inertial sensors that measure rotation rate based on
[inertial Coriolis force](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Coriolis_force). MEMS gyroscopes are prone
to drift that is caused by the sensor's gravitational sensitivity which deforms the sensor's
internal mechanical system. Gyroscopes oscillate at relative high frequencies, e.g., 10s of kHz, and
therefore, might consume more power compared to other sensors.

### Orientation sensors {: #orientation-sensors }

<figure class="w-figure">

>   {% Video src="video/8WbTDNrhLsU0El80frMBGE4eMCD3/rhpW784mCvR78nwg6rd1.mp4", width="800" %}

Author: ```suggestion
  {% Video src="video/8WbTDNrhLsU0El80frMBGE4eMCD3/rhpW784mCvR78nwg6rd1.mp4", width="800", autoplay="true" %}
```

Reviewer 3: I should have said `loop` as well sorry ;)

---
title: Sensors for the web
subhead: |
  Use the Generic Sensor API to get access to on-device sensors like accelerometers,
  gyroscopes, and magentometers.
authors:
  - alexshalamov
  - pozdnyakov
  - thomassteiner
description: |
  Sensors are used in many applications to enable advanced features
  like games that take the orientation or the acceleration of the device
  they run on into account. The Generic Sensor API provides a generic interface
  for accessing such sensor data on the web.
date: 2017-09-18

> updated: 2021-02-11

Author: ```suggestion
updated: 2021-02-17
```

  if (error.name === 'SecurityError') {
    console.log('Sensor construction was blocked by the Permissions Policy.');
  } else if (error.name === 'ReferenceError') {
    console.log('Sensor is not supported by the User Agent.');
  } else {
    throw error;
  }
}
```

## Polyfill

For browsers that do not support the Generic Sensor API, a
[polyfill](https://github.com/kenchris/sensor-polyfills) is available. The polyfill allows you to
load only the relevant sensors' implementations.

```js
// Import the objects you need.
import { Gyroscope, AbsoluteOrientationSensor } from './src/motion-sensors.js';

// And they're ready for use!
const gyroscope = new Gyroscope({ frequency: 15 });
const orientation = new AbsoluteOrientationSensor({ frequency: 60 });
```

## What are all these sensors? How can I use them? {: #what-are-sensors-how-to-use-them }

Sensors is an area that might need a brief introduction. If you are familiar with sensors, you can
jump right to the [hands-on coding section](#lets-code). Otherwise, let's look at each supported
sensor in detail.

### Accelerometer and linear acceleration sensor {: #acceleration-and-linear-accelerometer-sensor }

 <figure class="w-figure">

>   {% Video src="video/8WbTDNrhLsU0El80frMBGE4eMCD3/FCf9iuCaNASEB3V0x8Ld.mp4", width="800", autoplay="true" %}

Author: ```suggestion
 {% Video src="video/8WbTDNrhLsU0El80frMBGE4eMCD3/FCf9iuCaNASEB3V0x8Ld.mp4", width="800", autoplay="true", loop="true" %}
```

>  {% Video src="video/8WbTDNrhLsU0El80frMBGE4eMCD3/FCf9iuCaNASEB3V0x8Ld.mp4", width="800", autoplay="true", loop="true" %}

Author: ```suggestion
 {% Video src="video/8WbTDNrhLsU0El80frMBGE4eMCD3/FCf9iuCaNASEB3V0x8Ld.mp4", width="800", autoplay="true", loop="true", muted="true" %}
```

of gravity. When a device is at rest, for instance lying flat on the table, the sensor would measure
≈ 0 m/s<sup>2</sup> acceleration on three axes.

### Gravity sensor {: #gravity-sensor }

It is already possible for users to manually derive readings close to those of a gravity sensor by
manually inspecting `Accelerometer` and `LinearAccelerometer` readings, but this can be cumbersome
and depend on the accuracy of the values provided by those sensors. Platforms such as Android can
provide gravity readings as part of the operating system, which should be cheaper in terms of
computation, provide more accurate values depending on the user's hardware, and be easier to use in
terms of API ergonomics. The
[`GravitySensor`](https://w3c.github.io/accelerometer/#gravitysensor-interface) returns the effect
of acceleration along the device's X, Y, and Z axis due to gravity.

{% Aside %} As of February 2021, GravitySensor is still
[under development](https://bugs.chromium.org/p/chromium/issues/detail?id=1163993) with no estimated
release date. {% endAside %}

### Gyroscope {: #gyroscope-sensor }

 <figure class="w-figure">

>   {% Video src="video/8WbTDNrhLsU0El80frMBGE4eMCD3/7VItzZMC9Rb2QglsE3s5.mp4", width="800", autoplay="true" %}

Author: ```suggestion
  {% Video src="video/8WbTDNrhLsU0El80frMBGE4eMCD3/7VItzZMC9Rb2QglsE3s5.mp4", width="800", autoplay="true", loop="true" %}
```

>   {% Video src="video/8WbTDNrhLsU0El80frMBGE4eMCD3/7VItzZMC9Rb2QglsE3s5.mp4", width="800", autoplay="true", loop="true" %}

Author: ```suggestion
  {% Video src="video/8WbTDNrhLsU0El80frMBGE4eMCD3/7VItzZMC9Rb2QglsE3s5.mp4", width="800", autoplay="true", loop="true", muted="true" %}
```

  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">
    Gyroscope sensor measurements
  </figcaption>
</figure>

The [`Gyroscope`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Gyroscope) sensor measures
angular velocity in radians per second around the device's local X, Y, and Z axis. Most consumer
devices have mechanical ([MEMS](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Microelectromechanical_systems))
gyroscopes, which are inertial sensors that measure rotation rate based on
[inertial Coriolis force](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Coriolis_force). MEMS gyroscopes are prone
to drift that is caused by the sensor's gravitational sensitivity which deforms the sensor's
internal mechanical system. Gyroscopes oscillate at relative high frequencies, e.g., 10s of kHz, and
therefore, might consume more power compared to other sensors.

### Orientation sensors {: #orientation-sensors }

<figure class="w-figure">

>   {% Video src="video/8WbTDNrhLsU0El80frMBGE4eMCD3/rhpW784mCvR78nwg6rd1.mp4", width="800", autoplay="true" %}

Author: ```suggestion
{% Video src="video/8WbTDNrhLsU0El80frMBGE4eMCD3/rhpW784mCvR78nwg6rd1.mp4", width="800", autoplay="true", loop="true" %}
```

> {% Video src="video/8WbTDNrhLsU0El80frMBGE4eMCD3/rhpW784mCvR78nwg6rd1.mp4", width="800", autoplay="true", loop="true" %}

Author: ```suggestion
{% Video src="video/8WbTDNrhLsU0El80frMBGE4eMCD3/rhpW784mCvR78nwg6rd1.mp4", width="800", autoplay="true", loop="true", muted="true" %}
```

  devices.
- [Security and privacy](#privacy-and-security) aspects are the top priority for the Generic Sensor
  API and provide much better security as compared to older sensor APIs. There is integration with
  the Permissions API.
- Automatic [synchronization with screen coordinates](#synchronization-with-screen-coordinates) is
  available for `Accelerometer`, `Gyroscope`, `LinearAccelerationSensor`,
  `AbsoluteOrientationSensor`, `RelativeOrientationSensor` and `Magnetometer`.

## Browser compatibility

The Generic Sensor API is supported by Google Chrome as of version 67. Most Chromium-derived
browsers like Microsoft Edge, Opera, or Samsung Internet support this API as well. For other
browsers, see [Can I use](https://caniuse.com/mdn-api_sensor). Note that the Generic Sensor API can
be [polyfilled](#polyfill).

## Available generic sensor APIs {: #available-generic-sensor-apis }

At the time of writing, there are several sensors that you can experiment with.

**Motion sensors:**

- `Accelerometer`
- `Gyroscope`
- `LinearAccelerationSensor`
- `AbsoluteOrientationSensor`
- `RelativeOrientationSensor`
- `GravitySensor`

> **Environmental sensors:**

Author: `chrome://flags/#enable-generic-sensor-extra-classes` actually. Good point!

> **Environmental sensors:**

Reviewer 3: FWIW, those are also gated by the experimental web platform features flag ;)
But let's not force web developers to enable all experimental web platform feeatures just for the Generic Sensor API extra classes indeed!

> - `AmbientLightSensor`
> - `Magnetometer`

Author: ```suggestion
- `AmbientLightSensor` (Behind the `#enable-generic-sensor-extra-classes` flag.)
- `Magnetometer` (Behind the `#enable-generic-sensor-extra-classes` flag.)
```

> - `AmbientLightSensor`
> - `Magnetometer`

Author: ```suggestion
- `AmbientLightSensor` (Behind the `#enable-generic-sensor-extra-classes` flag.)
- `Magnetometer` (Behind the `#enable-generic-sensor-extra-classes` flag.)
```

## Feature detection {: #feature-detection }

Feature detection of hardware APIs is tricky, since you need to detect both whether the browser
supports the interface in question, _and_ whether the device has the corresponding sensor. Checking
whether the browser supports an interface is straightforward. (Replace `Accelerometer` with any of
the other interfaces mentioned [above](#available-generic-sensor-apis).)

```js
if ('Accelerometer' in window) {
  // The `Accelerometer` interface is supported by the browser.
  // Does the device have an accelerometer, though?
}
```

For an actually meaningful feature detection result, you need to try to connect to the sensor, too.
This example illustrates how to do that.

```js
let accelerometer = null;
try {
  accelerometer = new Accelerometer({ frequency: 10 });
  accelerometer.addEventListener('error', (event) => {
    // Handle runtime errors.
    if (event.error.name === 'NotAllowedError') {
      console.log('Permission to access sensor was denied.');
    } else if (event.error.name === 'NotReadableError') {
      console.log('Cannot connect to the sensor.');
    }
  });

>   accelerometer.addEventListener('reading', () => reloadOnShake(accelerometer));

Reviewer 3: Some users may be confused with this function `reloadOnShake()`.
```suggestion
  accelerometer.addEventListener('reading', () => () => { /* Handle reading */ });
```

Author: Yes, good catch. The function doesn't make sense in the generalization.

  if (error.name === 'SecurityError') {
    console.log('Sensor construction was blocked by the Permissions Policy.');
  } else if (error.name === 'ReferenceError') {
    console.log('Sensor is not supported by the User Agent.');
  } else {
    throw error;
  }
}
```

## Polyfill

For browsers that do not support the Generic Sensor API, a
[polyfill](https://github.com/kenchris/sensor-polyfills) is available. The polyfill allows you to
load only the relevant sensors' implementations.

```js
// Import the objects you need.
import { Gyroscope, AbsoluteOrientationSensor } from './src/motion-sensors.js';

// And they're ready for use!
const gyroscope = new Gyroscope({ frequency: 15 });
const orientation = new AbsoluteOrientationSensor({ frequency: 60 });
```

## What are all these sensors? How can I use them? {: #what-are-sensors-how-to-use-them }

Sensors is an area that might need a brief introduction. If you are familiar with sensors, you can
jump right to the [hands-on coding section](#lets-code). Otherwise, let's look at each supported
sensor in detail.

### Accelerometer and linear acceleration sensor {: #acceleration-and-linear-accelerometer-sensor }

>  <figure class="w-figure">

Reviewer 3: Shall we specify a width of 100% to avoid mini videos?

Author: D'accord. The quality is still tolerable.

while the
[`RelativeOrientationSensor`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/RelativeOrientationSensor)
provides data representing rotation of a device hosting motion sensors in relation to a stationary
reference coordinate system.

All modern 3D JavaScript frameworks support [quaternions](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Quaternion)
and [rotation matrices](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rotation_matrix) to represent rotation;
however, if you use WebGL directly, the `OrientationSensor` conveniently has both a
[`quaternion` property](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/OrientationSensor/quaternion)
and a
[`populateMatrix()` method](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/OrientationSensor/populateMatrix).
Here are few snippets:

**[three.js](https://threejs.org/docs/index.html#api/core/Object3D.quaternion)**

```js
let torusGeometry = new THREE.TorusGeometry(7, 1.6, 4, 3, 6.3);
let material = new THREE.MeshBasicMaterial({ color: 0x0071c5 });
let torus = new THREE.Mesh(torusGeometry, material);
scene.add(torus);

// Update mesh rotation using quaternion.
const sensorAbs = new AbsoluteOrientationSensor();

> sensorAbs.onreading = () => torus.quaternion.fromArray(sensorAbs.quaternion);

Reviewer 3: We should be consistent in this article and pick either `onreading` or `addEventListener('reading', ...`.
It applies to `onerror` as well.

Author: `onreading` and `onerror` are the winners!

Sensor API controls access to sensors data for a frame.

By default the `Sensor` objects can be created only within a main frame or same-origin subframes,
thus preventing cross-origin iframes from unsanctioned reading of sensor data. This default behavior
can be modified by explicitly enabling or disabling of the corresponding
[policy-controlled features](https://w3c.github.io/webappsec-permissions-policy/#features).

The snippet below illustrates granting accelerometer data access to a cross-origin iframe, meaning
that now `Accelerometer` or `LinearAccelerationSensor` objects can be created there.

```html
<iframe src="https://third-party.com" allow="accelerometer" />
```

### Sensor readings delivery can be suspended

Sensor readings are only accessible by a visible web page, i.e., when the user is actually
interacting with it. Moreover, sensor data would not be provided to the parent frame if the user
focus changes to a cross-origin subframe. This prevents the parent frame infering user input.

## What's next? {: #whats-next }

There is a set of already specified sensor classes to be implemented in the near future such as

> [Proximity sensor](https://w3c.github.io/proximity/); however, thanks to the great extensibility of

Reviewer 3: Is this still being worked on?
I would emphasize AmbientLightSensor and GravitySensor instead.

Author: Gravity is almost there, so I list ALS and Proximity for now.

[Candidate Recommendation](https://www.w3.org/Consortium/Process/Process-19991111/tr.html#RecsCR)
maturity level, hence, the feedback from web and browser developers is highly appreciated. Let us
know what features would be great to add or if there is something you would like to modify in the
current API.

Please feel free to file [specification issues](https://github.com/w3c/sensors/issues/new) as well
as [bugs](https://bugs.chromium.org/p/chromium/issues/entry) for the Chrome implementation.

## Resources

- Demo projects:
  [https://intel.github.io/generic-sensor-demos/](https://intel.github.io/generic-sensor-demos/)
- Generic Sensor API specification: [https://w3c.github.io/sensors/](https://w3c.github.io/sensors/)
- Specification issues:
  [https://github.com/w3c/sensors/issues](https://github.com/w3c/sensors/issues)
- W3C working group mailing list: [public-device-apis@w3.org](mailto:public-device-apis@w3.org)
- Chrome Feature Status:
  [https://www.chromestatus.com/feature/5698781827825664](https://www.chromestatus.com/feature/5698781827825664)
- Implementation bugs:
  [http://crbug.com?q=component:Blink>Sensor](http://crbug.com?q=component:Blink>Sensor)

> - Sensors-Dev Google group:

Reviewer 3: Is it active?

Author: Looks abandoned. Removed the link.
